(*) - optional
0+ - zero or more
\* | k=1.. - 

Data-type is a partition of fixed size chunk of memory into a hierarcy. 

Possible syntax is:

data-type = "["data-partition, 0+"]" | data-point-size data-point-count
data-partition = data-point-size data-point-count "," 0+ | data-type | type-identifier 

Data-type can be aliased.
Aliased data-types can have associated functions. 
Those together are called type
Functions can be assembly code (or target language code). 

Possible syntax is: 
type = "type" type-identifier "=" data-type ("{" function-list "}")
associated-function-declaration = type-identifier "{" function-list "}" 

There can be declared a variable of some order. 
Variable of order k have associated variable of order k+1 that restricts its values and describes value-distribution. 
Variable of order 1 is a data-variable and is the bottom of sequence, and variable of order 2 is a type-variable, 
of order 3 is type-constraint.
Type-variable is a type and value distribution for every data-partition of associated data-type. 
Also since variable of order k can be considered as variable of order k+1 that constraints to one possible value then every variable can be considered being of infinite order. 

Possible syntax is:
variable-declaration = variable-k-declaration | k = 1.. 

Every pure function call is treated as asyncronous process, that is awaited when its result is needed for some computation. 
There is a support for algebraic data types, meaning we support exponents, products and unions of types. 

sum = type ("|" type)+
product = type ("," type)+
exponent = type => type
alg_type = sum | product | exponent | unit | void
unit = "()"
void = "void" 

There is enum operator that can downgrade exponents and products (aka logarithm?) preserving labels.
enum exponent -> enum type1 => type2 -> (type1, type2)
enum (type1, type2) -> type1 | type2

These operations have some properties to adjust
They can be either ordered or not (meaning elements can be accessed by indexing, though exponents are already ordered), 
labeled or not (elements are accessed by labels). 

labeled = ident":" type
unordered = "["type"]" 

Data without both properties can only be iterated to access data. 

collected_set_iterable = "..." iterable 

These properties together describe sets (unordered unlabeled product), 
tuples (ordered unlabeled product), 
finite arrays (monotyped tuples),
records (labeled unordered products), 
ordered map, 
enumeration (labeled unordered unions),
sums (unlabeled unordered unions)
ordered enumeration (c-style enums) and type tuple?

There are also notions of iterated types, mutability, ownership and equivalences.

Iterated types are product types for which its data can be accessed one at a time and only once.
Variables of such types can be collected into tuples and tuples can be iterated.
Ownership describes which scope handles data, thus scope implies some finite lifetime of this data
Mutability simply describes whether data can be modified or only transfomed. 
Concept of execution time can be described as count of calls to evaluation function and can be used to model computation complexity to decide optimisation strategy for particular code piece 
Equivalences describe what expressions can be treated as interchengeable by the compiler. 
Equivalences are defined by expression pattern, optional expression context and result
Possible syntax:

equivalence = "equivalence" (expr | { "..."? (stmt (";" | "\n"))* stmt ";"? "..."? }) ("given" context)? "~" expr
context = "let" ident = expr | value-pattern | equivalence

Examples:
equvalence x + x + x <=> 3 * x
equvalence x given let x = y <=> y

Equivalences may be used to assist programmer by proposing simplifications.

We may have ternary logic. 
Meaning there are three logical values - true, false, unknown

There can be declared a class. 
Each instance of an encapsulating class is an actor.

There are async\await operators:

async operator - takes any value and constructs Future from it. 
await operator - takes any value and if it was a Future then unwraps it by awaiting result of all of its computations (i.e. Future<A> -> A).

As means of simple macros is inline operator - takes any value expression (will take anything immediatly after it) 
and inlines any variables in it at compile time if possible (i.e. equvalence inline (x z) given let x = y <=> y z).
Inlining may fail to find an expression to inline if all variables are mutable.
Functions with mutable closure are considered mutable values as well.
Together with optimisation via equivalences and expression simplification may compute expressions at compile time.

Expression simplification will proceed by minimising expression complexity (EC) evaluated as following:

EC(expr) = 
  top of expr is built in operator (including func application, =>, tuple and block literal) -> sum(EC(arg_n))
  top of expr is built in literal or an identifier -> 1

Expression optimisation then consists of these steps:

1) Evaluate complexity.
2) If complexity = 1 return given expression
3) Search for all equivalences that match given expression and expression context.
4) For each equivalence substitute, optimise and evaluate variant complexity.
5) Choose variant with least complexity.

Since this process is recursive and complexity may grow during substitution it may never halt, so we should guarantee that it is monotonously decreasing in terms of EC.
Possible solution is to restrict equivalences only to those which are strictly decreasing in EC.

Declarations are parsed breadth first - before parsing any expressions we must declare everything we may need
In script file we may separate declarations and statements as following: 
entities in file are expected to be declaration until we fail to parse declaration, then afterwards everything is expected to be statement.

When declaring a nominal type, one could also assign it additional behaviours like methods or operator implementations. 
Its accoumplished with combination of other nominal types representing interface 
and a generic function to implement it that accepts an definition (implementor) and the other nominal type (implementee). 
Kinda analogous to impl..for.. blocks in rust.
For an type to require particular interface it just intersects (& operator on types) whatever it wants with that interface.

The language must be able to syntactically support any of design patterns (you know, those from gof and other guys) 
with a way to customize feature's behaviour according to design patterns.
Mostly it means that there is an interface (nominal type in language's std library) for that feature, a language's default implementation for it, 
and possibility to redefine it with user's own implementation by implementing respective interface. 

type invariants can be added as an enum variant with given invariant in a form of composition with void type (so that it doesn't actually alter initial type becatuse variant can't be instantiated) and whenever needed 
it can be modified by some generic function by generating the same type variant but with mapped invariant. Probably requires compile time evaluation of constant expressions.